Permalink: /the-body-politic/
Title: The Body Politic
Tags: government,civic-band,sociology
Date: 2025-12-31
Summary: How do you put a city on the couch?

# The Body Politic

How do we model a political system? A ridiculously simplistic but often useful way to model a living body is as a three-part system. The body has inputs, a control mechanism, and outputs. The hand in the fire gets too hot, the nervous system goes "yowch!", the hand is pulled away. The ears sense vibrations that correspond to sounds, the brain hears "what would you like to drink?", the mouth replies "a Shiraz, please". To be clear, and to borrow a quote, this model is "a very graphic analogy which aids understanding wonderfully while being, strictly speaking, **wrong in every possible way**"

This model of thinking about bodies is older than I can find a concrete reference for. Modeling political systems as bodies in this way is at least as old as the 11th Century. Picture in your mind the cover of Hobbes' Leviathan with the head of the king and the body made legion striding across the land. While in the United States we don't have a king [citation needed], we do have multiple overlapping layers of representational leviathans. Where I live, without any searching, I am part of the Body Politic of: the Alameda City Council, the Alameda Unified School District, the Alameda County Board of Supervisors, the Bay Area Rapid Transit Board of Supervisors, the Alameda County Transit Board of Supervisors, the Metropolitan Transportation Commission, the California State Assembly, the California State Senate, the United States House of Representatives, the United States Senate. I'm not counting those leviathans headed by a single individual, but you can fill in the blanks. I'm sure I'm missing some, because while expanding _just a moment's thought_ I also came up with: The East Bay Regional Parks District and the East Bay Municipal Utility District. Oh, and the Alameda Power Commission. And probably something about mosquito abatement. There's always something about mosquito abatement.

That's at least 13 bodies politic that I am represented by and operate within. And all of those bodies have neighbors, and their neighbors have neighbors. And they have superset bodies, many of them, and subset bodies, many of them. If just one non-overlapping representative from every body politic in the United States went to Ann Arbor, Michigan, they'd fill "The Big House", the stadium for the University of Michigan Wolverines. It seats 107,000 people.

All of these municipalities exist in some form of community with all the others, and ideas spread amongst the community. Sometimes the ideas result in clear benefit for the people represented, like increased library hours. Some ideas, like Automated License Plate Readers, result in extremely nebulous and possibly negative benefit. Some ideas, like militarized police spending, represent an idea so far from public benefit that they are effectively a _neurosis_ of the Body Politic. This is the first stepping stone to the idea I ultimately want to get to, so let's step carefully onto it:

> Municipal political bodies develop personalities and neuroses separate from but influenced by the governing representatives of those bodies.

If you think this makes sense on first pass, it makes even more sense when you realize the "brain" of the municipal political body is not just the elected officials, but the staff supporting them. The City Manager and the City Clerk and the accountants and the paralegals and the permit reviewers and the city inspectors all are influenced and directed by what comes out of the City Council. Any process or regulation the City Council puts in place becomes a habit in the brain of the body politic, and habits are hard to change. The habits of the body politic often change slower than the elected officials trying to change them. This is true from the local Animal Control Board all the way up to the Vatican, which is maybe the last true example we have of a Hobbesian Leviathan and also absolutely a Municipal Government. The Pope is a Mayor, don't @ me.

Treating all the above as true, there's two more ideas I need you to hold on to, and then we'll be ready for the wrap-up. Idea one: If Municipal Governments can be modeled as a body, complete with a brain that can develop personalities and neuroses, then they can be psychoanalyzed as a single entity. Idea two: These Municipal Bodies Politic can spread their personalities and neuroses across the community of municipal leviathans through a sort of nation-state scale social contagion, and we can therefore study municipal behaviors with epidemiology techniques. If we can study municipalities in this way, can we identify issues before they arise? Can we predict where a neurosis is developing before it blooms?

What has been preventing us from applying psychoanalysis and epidemiology to municipal bodies at scale is a lack of coherent data. You can't put a city on the couch and ask it questions, and you can't do a blood test for "Flock License Plate Cameras" across an entire region with timestamps of when the infection started.

Or, at least, you _couldn't_. This data is what [CivicBand](https://civic.band), the non-profit project I've been working on for the past three years, enables. CivicBand has, in effect, readouts from the brains of every municipality tracked, in some cases going back decades, and in some cases including both higher brain functions (City Council, Board of Supervisors) and specialized sub-functions (Planning Board, Public Safety Commission). This data is 900 municipalities strong, and I'm working every day to expand and normalize it.

What I need to prove out that municipalities can be tracked, treated, and healed with these techniques is research help and funding. If you are a researcher or journalist who wants to dive into this data, reach out and you'll get all the access I can give you. I'd love to start with library service reductions or ALPR adoption and pushback, but I'm open to the ideas that most inspire you.

If you want this research to exist in the world, but aren't a researcher or journalist yourself, any amount you can donate helps. If that's still too much, consider practicing some positive social contagion and share this with a friend.
